# Reading Platforms: A Concise History of the Electronic Book

**Exhibit A**

"To continue reading at today's speed I must have a machine," Bob Brown
wrote in his famous avant-garde manifesto *Readies* (1930), which some
scholars take as presaging the electronic book. To this end he imagined
"a simple reading machine which I can carry or move around, attach to
any old electric light plug and read hundred thousand word novels in ten
minutes."[^1] Print matter would be distributed in "dainty pillboxes" on
mechanized rolls, wound automatically past a magnifying glass. "My
machine is equipped with controls so the reading record can be turned
back or short ahead," he wrote, "a chapter reread or the happy ending
anticipated."[^2]

Brown's blueprints did not rise out of a vacuum --- they were preceded
by over a century of technological developments in micrographic print, a
history itself concomitant with advances in photography. Where Nicéphore
Niépce and Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre are conventionally considered to
have invented photography in the 1830s, by 1857 the *Encyclopaedia
Britannica* included a discussion on "microscopic photography," by which
tiny "copies of dispatches and valuable paper and plans might be
transmitted by post, and secrets might be placed in spaces not larger
than a full stop or a small blot of ink."[^3] It is reported that the
French photographer René Dagron sent more than 60,000 micrographic
messages by pigeon carrier during the Prussian siege of Paris in 1870
and in 1872. The Russian imperial army similarly experimented with
micrographic maps for concealment and espionage.[^4] "It is natural that
such results appear miraculous," wrote a pair of librarian-engineers
presenting their ideas "On a New Form of the Book: The Microphotographic
Book" (*Sur une forme novelle du livre: le livre microphotographique*)
at the convention of Institut International de Bibliographie held in
Marseilles, France in 1906. Placed into a "simple enlarger" and
illuminated, text would be "projected on a ground glass that closes the
opposite side of the *camera obscura*," the authors explained. "It is
there that the reading of text will take place," they wrote: "A slide
positioned on the stage of a microscope of the carriage of a typewriter
will circulate the fiche from left to right and top to bottom. Then at
the reader's will, the microphotographic pages on each centimeter of the
film will come successively in front of the lens to be read."[^5]

In the United States, the long history of micrography included portable
devices such as B.A. Fiske's "Reading Machine," consisting of a
hand-held magnifying glass wand that was to be passed over a paper-tape
medium (labelled 10 in Figure 1). "I find it is entirely feasible,"
Fiske wrote, "by suitable photographic or other process, to reduce a two
and one-half inch column of typewritten or printed matter to a column of
one-quarter of an inch wide, so that by arranging five such columns side
by side of both sides of a paper tape \[...\] it becomes possible to
present one hundred thousand words, the length of an average book, on a
tape slightly longer than forty inches."[^6] By the 1920s, micrographic
equipment was routinely manufactured by the Eastman Kodak company,
Rectigraph (later Xerox), and Remington Rand Corporation.[^7]

\< insert figure-1.png here \>

Caption: Bradley Fiske, "Reading Machine," United States US1411008A,
filed November 20, 1920, and issued March 28, 1922.

In Brown's *Readies*, we glimpse the gradual reshaping of books, made
possible by the storage capabilities of paper ribbons, glass plates,
lenses, and rolls of celluloid. Once inseparable as device and data
format, the book would gradually delaminate onto multiple surfaces: some
supporting its habituated semantic coherence --- a progression of pages
--- others extending it to include other modalities of reading: leafing,
browsing, searching, storing, selling, and interpreting.

**Exhibits B**, **C**

Electronic books proper came into being by multiple means, one of the
earliest being a part of the PLATO (Programmed Logic for Automatic
Teaching Operations), a computer controlled teaching system implemented
at the University of Illinois, Urbana in the 1960s. PLATO's history as
an educational tool and a proto-internet information sharing network is
well explored by historians such as Joy Lisi Rankin in her
ground-breaking *People's History of Computing in the United States*
(2018). Less known is PLATO's original coinage of the term "electronic
book," consisting of a "bank of slides" of the type usually "found in a
textbook or in class notes," but in this case "prestored in an
electronic slide selector" that could be "shared by all the students"
who were also able to "view same or different slides simultaneously
\[...\] by connecting electronically to the student's television
display."[^8] The system was capable of storing 122 such slides and
provided access to them in an arbitrary order in less than a
microsecond.[^9]

In a parallel development circa 1962, the US National Science Foundation
announced "a new publishing program of electronic 'books' contained on
magnetic tape." The quotation marks around the word books indicate a
certain unease with the functional transference between technological
systems. Developed by Documentation, Inc., a Washington D.C. firm, these
so-called "computexts" were meant to facilitate "high-speed computer
searches in readable English." "An Electronic Index to Chemical Patents"
was the first title released to take advantage of that capability. "The
electronic index will cover 150,000 patents issued over the last 17
years," read the report. "\[T\]he set of tapes covering this data can be
contained in only one cubic foot of storage space."[^10]

Computexts and PLATO electronic books were enabled by the simultaneous
maturing of three technologies: magnetic tape storage, cathode ray tube
(CRT) television, and the typewriter. As a storage medium, tape offered
a number of advantages over its predecessors. It was more portable than
paper, punch cards, or celluloid. It lasted longer than other mechanized
forms of storage, because electro-magnetic reading and writing devices
made light contact with their medium --- unlike, for example, punch-card
systems, where, in order to read or write, the mechanism made physical
contact with paper. Magnetic polarities were also easily reversible,
making for a rewritable medium in which errors of transcription could be
immediately reversed. Electromagnetic inscription on tape had a major
weakness however: being invisible to the human eye, it denied unassisted
access. Readers needed a special device to see it, and writers, an
esoteric implement to leave a mark. The increasing commercialization of
CRT television displays in the 1960s restored vision. A mark on tape
could be revitalized onscreen. Typewriters further reinstated our
tactile ability to edit stored magnetic inscription. In concert, tube,
tape, and typewriter could approximate the affordances of ink and paper,
reading and writing.

By 1979, it was already possible to envisage a "portable, electronic
viewing device" with ambitions "to replace presently existing books,
magazines, microfilm, computer printouts and other printed media."[^11]
In his US Patent 4,159,417, David Rubincam proposed "an information
storage and display apparatus \[...\] having a memory, a \[laser\]
sensor for sensing information from memory, logic circuitry operatively
coupled with the sensor, and a display in operative relationship with
the logic circuitry for visually displaying the information stored in
memory" (Figure 2).[^12] The content of Rubincam's electronic books was
to be stored on holographic memory cards, one of which could store up to
200 Mbits of data or approximately ten average-sized volumes in plain
text without formatting or illustrations (Figure 3). The front of the
device housed several interfaces: a variable speed page turner switch
(labelled 70), a page number display (72), ten buttons by which a reader
could enter specific pages (74), and several "fine tuning deflectors, in
the event that the laser beam is not centred properly on the
hologram."[^13] The presence of such a mechanical calibration mechanism
indicates that Rubincam still thought of his holograms as standing in a
direct, one-to-one relationship to book pages. A physical movement over
a holographic medium entailed the corresponding movement on a displayed
page. This analogical correspondence would later be severed in media
that contained neither pages nor paragraphs, but rather data structures
that could be reassembled into pages and paragraphs in the process of
rendering their facsimile.

\< insert figure-2.png here \>

Caption: David Rubincam, "Electronic Book," United States US4159417A,
filed October 28, 1977, and issued June 26, 1979.

Within the historically contingent agglomeration of these three specific
technologies --- screen, portable storage, and keyboard --- we observe
the development of a bridge-like structure, expanding to span the gap
between media and human sensory organs.

"To grasp the shadowy and fantasmal form of a book," the literary critic
Percy Lubbock famously wrote in 1921, "to hold it fast, to turn it over
and survey it at leisure---that is the effort of a critic of books, and
it is perpetually defeated."[^14] This failure of interpretation stems
from the fundamental incompatibilities between the innermost symbolic,
discursive realms and the outermost, corporeal, and embodied techniques
of comprehension: the first, limited by the expressive possibilities of
language, and the second by the cognitive and perceptual mechanics of
the human body. Techniques of mediation between the two are thereby
neither wholly determinate nor wholly socially constructed. Rather, they
advance through a series of negotiated protocols, by which specific
interfaces or channels of transmission develop between disparate
symbolisms and physicalities. The trans-mediation of mind-things into
paper-and-ink things entails the corresponding transfiguration of
content, the latter in the simple sense of that which is being
contained. A "line" of reasoning inhabits a line of text on a page,
although the two structures do not transpose perfectly. The structure of
thoughts in the mind --- their transcendent form --- and the structure
of lines on a page --- their immanent format --- meet at the interface
of incompatible symbolic and biological systems.

An interface enables the compatibility between physically heterotopic
systems at the point of contact. In this way, the tail end of a fork is
moulded to conform to the hand --- a handle --- where it begins to
resemble hands, bearing the imprint of a palm and its digits. A hand for
its part becomes more fork-like in the grasping of the tool. Similarly,
the interface of a digital book is that physical adaptation that allows
for the physical exchange between mind and symbol, reshaping both in the
process of transmission.

**Exhibit D**

Where minds and ideas inhabit brains and bodies, digital inscriptions
increasingly occupy more remote locations, such as solid state drives
(SSDs) and liquid crystal displays (LCDs). Such disparate systems store
data in radically divergent formats: the brain, as a lattice of
connected neurons; books in chapters and paragraphs; and SSDs in
polarized configurations of floating gates. Despite these first-order
material differences, we are able to recognize similarities across
conventional, second-order mental structures, or "content." In computer
memory, paragraphs of Virginia's Wolf's *To the Lighthouse* might be
stored as a series of non-sequential, fragmented patches of data. On
screen, they appear as an orderly procession of paragraphs on a page.
Lubbock reminds us that in our minds, books once again disintegrate into
fragments: we inadvertently forget certain details, invent others, and
remember events out of order. Once read, a novel literally "ceases to
exist" as an object: the eye leaves a pile of discarded pages in its
wake.

Lubbock struggled conceptually, as did the contemporary critic Caroline
Levine in *Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network* (2015) because for
each books indicate mental and physical structures at once. Even the
most materialist of literary critics tends to privilege artworks over
art objects, because the appreciation of objects requires applied
methods outside of mental introspection. Both *The Craft of Fiction* and
*Forms* stop just short of media studies. "If only there were one single
tangible and measurable fact about the book," Lubbock wrote, "if it
could be weighed like a statute, say, or measured like a picture --- it
would support a world of shadows."[^15] But the book does exist tangibly
on paper and in mind, although in different formats. To traverse the
two, we need to disambiguate the meaning of the book in the sense of "a
mental form," from that in the sense of "a physical structure," and
further to attend to the dynamics of transposition between divergent
media: hardware and wetware --- inscription, instrument, and biology.

Traversing between such first- and second plus-order structures follows
strict and often rigidly defined conventions that shape the reification
of thought into thing. Consider the popular EPUB format, which has its
roots in the Open Book™ Publication Structure (OEBPS). According to the
Library of Congress records, the format was created in 1999 by the Open
eBook Authoring Group, which consisted of "over 25 individuals from
organizations participating in the Open eBook initiative, launched in
October 1998 \[...\] convened and facilitated by NIST (the National
Institute of Standards and Technology.)" The Authoring Group "included
participants representing all aspects of the electronic publishing
industry, and was open to any interested individual or organization."
The document begins with a statement of the group's purpose and scope:
"to provide a specification for representing the content of electronic
books" and "to give content providers \[...\] minimal and common
guidelines which ensure fidelity, accuracy, accessibility, and
presentation of electronic content over various electronic book
platforms."[^16]

The concern with "various electronic book platforms" acknowledges the
difficulty of describing document structure under conditions where the
exact dimensions of the medium are not known in advance. The Open Book
could have been displayed on devices large and small, in full colour or
monochrome, or on those devices providing "mainly audio or tactile
interfaces."[^17] The media-agnostic nature of the format necessitated
an abstracted style layer, expressed in HTML/XML and CSS mark-up
schemas, which would describe textual elements such as footnotes and
titles in relative terms such as left, right, top, bottom, or centre. In
addition to these positional elements, the format specified social
metadata, for example "creator" and "contributor" types and subtypes
such as annotator, book producer, collaborator, illustrator, printer,
reviewer, sponsor, and translator.[^18]

The trademark symbol in the title of the standard along with the
copyright notice on its front page undermined its emphasis on the open,
participatory nature of the endeavour. The admixture of content, layout,
and para-textual metadata further eroded the boundaries between strictly
formal, content-based abstractions (chapter, paragraph, page) and social
roles encoded into, although not apparent at the surface of the
document. From the moment of its founding, the "open" ebook format was
embedded within the North American copyright regime, in a way that would
later allow "content creators" and "persons or corporate bodies" to
police access to the "reading device," that is, "the physical platform
(hardware and software) on which publications are rendered."[^19] The
reading platform emerged from this amalgam of text, technology, social
edict, and compliant body posture --- the constituent elements of an
electronic book.

What does a format format? Because platforms facilitate the transition
from thought to thing, they enter the realm of politics. Neither neutral
nor natural constructs, formats ultimately determine channels of
distribution. Among the members of the EPUB working group one finds
corporate representatives from Adobe, Apple, Barnes & Noble, Google,
IBM, HarperCollins, Pearson, Penguin, Random House, Sharp, and Sony. By
such means, content is enveloped by conventions, technologies, and
institutions that mediate access. To read a book, I encounter it first
through a social structure --- a library, bookstore, a friend's
recommendation, or a course syllabus. I then pick it up as an object.
Historically, some books were kept under lock and key. Contemporary
books may be dispensed by a licence, limited to a single reader or
device. Finally, a spatial arrangement of symbolic elements on a page
--- words, sentences, paragraphs, and chapters --- allows me to
transform the physical object into an ideational work of art.

Where books represent any number of such linked configurations, the book
as a platform fixes a specific stack of social, technological, and
symbolic commitments into a rigid chain. For example, we understand that
Nintendo "the gaming platform" has something to do with Nintendo Co.,
Ltd., and that a "Nintendo game", while under copyright, can only become
a game on Nintendo-sanctioned devices. Amazon Kindle and Adobe Digital
Edition platforms strive for the same sort of vertical integration.
Readers, however, habitually equivocate distinct objects into familiar
aesthetic categories, as if *Hamlet* the Nintendo game would read the
same as *Hamlet* the theatre production or *Hamlet* in Shakespeare's
collected works. Of course even in print, specific textual witnesses
often differ materially from the archetype idea of the text, thanks to
printing error or editorial intervention. But when fixed into a
platform, these specific instantiations of the text begin to diverge
also in their "canned" interpretive capabilities: this book can be
shared and this one cannot; this one is available in China and this one
was redacted; I can take notes here but not there.

Were telepathy real, I would have liked to receive an author's thoughts
immediately.. Within a profoundly mediated world, we avail ourselves of
text and technology. To be received, a message must not only be
understood and interpreted, both operations on the symbolic level , but
also transformed from pixel or paper shapes into brain shapes, through a
series of operations at thelevel of the material. Given the relative
stability of a medium this process can become naturalized and
conventionally ignored. Our assumptions about hermeneutics --- the art
of interpretation --- still rest on habituated assumptions about print,
assumptions that cannot be sustained when decoding silicon chips, or
stone tablets for that matter. Problematically for the reader of
platform books, the physics of computation rest in remote material
entities --- electromagnetic charges and floating gate transistors ---
which are not immediately accessible to the human senses. Software
engineers and user interface designers have dealt with this problem by
simulating the affordances of a more familiar medium so as to rely
onextant habits and intuitions. "Our familiarity with the metaphors
blinds us to their nonrepresentational status," Johanna Drucker wrote on
the importance of reading interfaces.[^20] A reader of an electronic
text may "scroll" or "flip" pages, in the tacit understanding that such
underlying motions involve neither scrolling nor flipping, but bitwise
operations --- the movement of liquid crystals and polar field effects.

The tactile properties of a book guide the eye and the hand to pace the
cadence of reading in real time. A reader's ability to read quickly or
slowly is similarly limited by the affordances of page turning. In
reading for the plot, readers can advance to the end of a story in a
manner that gamers cannot when playing most computer games. Some
electronic books are configured to page the book automatically or to
measure the duration of the reading engagement in time units (three
hours left in this book) rather than in pages (200 pages left).

A page format also affects the pacing of narrative. Elements of a plot
must, for all their variability, fit within a book. Such constraints are
natural, arising from the material particularities of ink and paper ---
reading a soggy book in torrential storm conditions, for example, is
ill-advised --- while others are artificially and conventionally
imposed, as is the case with page dimensions or the fact that I am
prevented from copying and pasting text out of my Kindle books. A
container "fits" its content, just as it casts the hand and eye into
convenient grasping and gazing gestures. Further, at its outer edge, a
format leaves an impression on larger epistemic structures within which
it is embedded. In this way, letters imprint on words, words on
paragraphs, paragraphs on pages, pages on books, books on shelves,
shelves on stacks, stacks on libraries, libraries on the episteme and
the world.

Interfaces determine the affordances of those actions that can be
performed in concert between heterotopic systems. Amidst the universe of
hand and fork possibilities, there lies a subset of actions available
only to the combined set. It is not enough to say that a handle affords
grasping; rather, it suggests grasping in a specific way, and
conversely, prevents other ways of grasping. An interface determines and
governs by spatial arrangement, conforming the hand to the handle and
the handle to the hand. In Drucker's sharp idiom, interfaces
"interpolate a user through disciplinary and scope regimes" and must be
read as "spaces of individual and collective subject formation." "Our
notions of privacy, property, identity, and even individual voice and
self," she concludes, "are modified constantly in the exchange, bound to
the cognitive modeling of experience through experience."[^21] For media
and other archaeologists, an interface beares the traces of its usage.
Knowing nothing about human hands, an alien visitor would reconstruct
them by the shape of our household tools, our input devices such as mice
and joysticks, and our eating and writing implements. Further, the
affordances of such artefacts would suggest their probable use: the
difference between an axe and an adze, for example, necessitates
distinct swinging motions, optimizing each for a differing purpose ---
one for the cutting and the other for the carving of wood. But just as
the difference in working edges leaves distinct tool-marks in wood,
their orientation also exhorts the user to assume a specific body
posture. Formatting cuts both ways, in other words; it constitutes a
mutual transposition of shared possibilities between hand, tool, and
material.

The shape of a printed book similarly places a number of constraints on
the human body, which include minimally sufficient visual acuity and
manual dexterity. Other-abled bodies, those severely far-sighted for
example, must resort to assistive devices such as reading glasses or
magnifying loupes. At the other side of the interface, the book also
shapes content. Literary formats such as the long novel or short story
derive their measure in relation to book objects that are manufactured
to conventional specifications. A shelved novel will always be longer
than a few pages and shorter than a million, and often at some average
range between the possible extremes. Micro- or macroscopic novels are
possible, but impractical. Such objects would violate the established
techniques of access, storage, and distribution of books.

**Exhibits E, F**

In the late 1980s, a group of designers and engineers at Apple in
collaboration with Grolier Electronic Publishing were among those who
turned to storytelling as formal means by which the alien physicality's
of a personal computer could be made more relatable for the general
public. The result of this multi-year project was *Guides*, an attempt
to reimagine an encyclopaedia of North American history for young
adults. Physically, its "delivery system" consisted of an Apple
Macintosh Plus (SE or II) with one megabyte of memory "combined with a
standard CD-ROM drive and running Apple's HyperCard software."[^22]
HyperCards were Apple's interface metaphor for a relational database,
and an evocation of a new medium, no longer constrained by its analogy
with print. The company liked to refer to HyperCards as "programming for
poets" and, alternatively, as "hypermedia." A hyper-card could hold any
type of information: text, sound, or video. Like an index card, it could
be stacked in any number of arbitrary configurations, shuffled,
labelled, or cross-referenced.[^23] On a Macintosh Plus, it occupied the
entirety of the screen, nine inches diagonally at 72 dots per inch
resolution.[^24]

Apple, more than other companies, understood that new technologies such
as screens and relational databases alienated their target audience of
home computer users. Poets that programmed therefore turned to narrative
theory to design interfaces that relied on familiar story tropes. Brenda
Laurel, who joined the *Guides* project shortly after completing her
dissertation on a "computer-based interactive fantasy system," wrote:
"In the Guides project, the typical spatial metaphor employed in most
hypertext or hypermedia databases is replaced by the notion of
information, not as a space, but as *a series of events unfolding over
time*."[^25] "Narrative includes both the story being told (content) and
the conditions of its telling (structure and context)," another member
of team explained. "Interface designers can adopt strategies from
narrative theory," Don Abbe wrote, to include "multiple representations
of events and information," or to use "characters as a means of
representing material with an explicitly acknowledged points of
view."[^26]

The encyclopaedia guides were in reality several faceted "topical keys"
or labels "created by the editors for classifying the articles within
the database.[^27] A taxonomic, epistemological formation in a catalogue
of articles was grouped under several available personalities, such as
settler, sea captain, scout, inventor, slave, and Indian. "Information
always reflects something about its source and its purpose,\" Laurel
wrote. It is a "made thing, influenced by its efficient, formal,
material, and end causes."[^28] A point of view, however archetypical,
could thus de-center the seemingly universal epistemological claims to
objectivity implicit in the notion of a technical database.

\< insert figure-3.png here \>

Caption: From Gitta Salomon, Tim Oren, and Kristee Kreitman, "Using
Guides to Explore Multimedia Databases," in *Proceedings of the
Twenty-Second Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
Volume IV: Emerging Technologies and Applications Track* (1989): 12.

Laudable as these design goals were for undermining a singular, heroic
narrative of American settler colonialism, they came at the cost of
another deterritorialization. The material contexts of electromagnetic
storage, difficult to traverse even for experienced software engineers,
were occluded in favour of successively nested metaphors: first, a
database, in itself a logical structure meant to simplify tedious data
manipulations in computer memory and second, the HyperCard, which
encased database abstractions within the more familiar language of
office supplies, such as cards, decks, and stacks. Finally, in yet
another metaphorical envelopment, HyperCards were represented as
anthropomorphic system agents that appeared in the guise of historical
actors. The chain of mediation between reader and inscription was
lengthened throughout, substituting literal contexts for metaphorical
ones. The nested metaphors underpinning the new encyclopaedia of
American history created a hierarchy of readers, whose most numerous
members were also the least trusted to affect the material conditions of
their interpretive activity.

My reading of Woolf's *To the Lighthouse* on Amazon Kindle today is
similarly circumscribed. The Kindle platform encompasses a number of
related devices, a piece of software on my mobile phone, an online
application, and a file format related to the EPUB standard, which now
includes stronger, cryptographic assurances against unauthorized use.
Kindle™ is ultimately a marketplace that extracts value from the
distribution of goods, including those, such as *To the Lighthouse*,
already in the public domain.

A screen overlay called "About This Book" greets the reader on opening
the volume. Here, I learn the novel received four stars on average by
470 readers and that most readers finish the novel in 3 hours and 17
minutes. I am given the option to "follow" Virginia Woolf in order to
receive new release alerts along with "occasional announcements."[^29] I
learn also that 583 passages in the novel were highlighted 5,848 times
by other fans of the author. Among the most popular passages is one at
location 114 of 2762 on my device: "It seemed to her such nonsense ---
inventing differences, when people, heaven knows, where different enough
without that." My edition is published by Feedbooks, a "cloud" publisher
specializing in digital reprinting of works in the public domain.[^30]
The Amazon Kindle application keeps track of and synchronizes my reading
activity across multiple devices. I am reminded that *To the Lighthouse*
is also available as an audiobook narrated by Juliet Stevenson.
Sponsored Products Related to this Item include *The Dirty Parts of the
Bible*, a novel by Sam Torode; *Lizzy Bennet Ghost Hunter: A Pride and
Prejudice Variation* by Jemma Thorne ("a haunted mystery mashup,
sisterhood, magic, and a dash of romance"); *Murder by Elf and Robot:
Death Visits the Theme Park* by Greg Kerr ("a private eye, and two
Icelandic sisters, discover a crazed killer is living in the same little
mansion with them.") Customers who bought this item also bought *Song of
Solomon* by Toni Morrison; *Their Eyes Were Watching God* by Zora Neale
Hurston; and *Steering the Craft: A Twenty-First-Century Guide to
Sailing the Sea of Story* by Ursula K. Le Guin.

Like Lubbock and Levine in their efforts to articulate a materialist
poetics, I struggle to find my own critical bearings in relation to such
densely winding and wound structure of inscription. To grasp the novel,
I followed a long chain of material transpositions --- transcoding and
transmediation --- so remote and alien at the scale of electromagnetic
and quantum phenomena that such physical manipulations themselves are
now presented to me in second, third, and n-plus order notational terms.
On the screen of a contemporary electronic book I observe only a surface
facet of a complex and phantasmal shape, fractured across multiple
surfaces, stored in varying formats, each affording divergent
possibilities for interpretation depending on a reader's placement and
privileges of access. The electronic book before me is a novel, a
device, a file format, a piece of software, a marketplace, a piece of
glass, a space for annotation, and a tracking device.

The agglomeration of these disparate components is unlikely to last in
its present form. Our libraries are not equipped to archive proprietary
book platforms. Books written or purchased under the auspices of a
closed system may soon go the way of Atari Jaguar or Saga Dreamcast.
Chapter 12, Section 1201 of The of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act
(US Code Title 17) specifies that scholars may be prohibited from
"circumventing technological measures that effectively control access to
a work protected under this title." Platform makers may, by such legal
means, embed instruments of censorship or surveillance into cultural
works, in a way that makes them physically resistant to interpretation
or critique. As a consequence, we know less about the history of
electronic publishing than we do about that of the pre-modern book. The
era of desktop publishing for example, spurred on by advances in
personal printing and page layout software in the 1990s, is almost
entirely missing from the scholarly record.

Gaps in the schematic history of the electronic book I have outlined
above may come into a greater focus through closer integration of
vocabularies between the related fields of book history, textual
criticism, philology, and media studies. A platform- and
infrastructure-studies approach to book history would thicken the
description of text as inscription suspended not only in its immediate
substratum, but also within broader scaffolding, spanning symbolic,
technological, and social topographies. "Our field of play is the entire
field of communication," the editors of *Book History* wrote in their
inaugural issue.[^31] The scholarly discipline of book history remains
essential in a democratic society in which communication is increasingly
facilitated by online platforms. Where Brown imagined books that
circulate in "dainty little pillboxes," books of the future may take
other fantastical forms, including actual pills and other technologies
of memory imprinting. For example, in 2013 scientists created a false
memory in mice by\
"optogenetically manipulating memory engram-bearing cells in the
hippocampus."[^32] Even if we can imagine a literature transmitted by
such means, neither speed nor efficacy nor optogenetics should obscure
the mechanisms of its mediation. No medium should be exempt from
criticism or analysis.

Despite what the "popular highlights" suggest on my Kindle, I would like
to dwell on the sonic cadence of the waves in *To the Lighthouse*, which
for Mrs. Ramsay usually provided "measured and soothing" affirmation, "a
tattoo \[!\] to her thoughts," in the background of daily experience.
"But at other times," Woolf wrote, "this sound which had been obscured
and concealed under the other sounds suddenly thundered hollow in her
ears," and "like a ghostly roll of drums, remorselessly beat the measure
of life, made one think of the destruction of the island and its
engulfment in the sea."[^33] In moments such as these, I think of Woolf
as a great theorist of elemental media, one who points the way toward
the study of our own technological engulfment.

Further Reading
---------------

Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong, *Updating to Remain the Same* (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2017).

Galloway, Alexander, *The Interface Effect* (Cambridge, UK: Polity,
2012).

Gitelman, Lisa, *Paper Knowledge: Toward a Media History of Documents*
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2014).

Gómez-Barris, Macarena, *The Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and
Decolonial Perspectives* (Durham: Duke University Press, 2017).

Hayles, Katherine, *How We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary
Technogenesis* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012).

Hu, Tung-Hui, *A Prehistory of the Cloud* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2016).

Hui, Yuk, *On the Existence of Digital Objects* (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 2016).

Jagoda, Patrick, *Network Aesthetics* (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2016).

Kirschenbaum, Matthew, *Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic
Imagination* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008).

Mattern, Shannon, *Code and Clay, Data and Dirt: Five Thousand Years of
Urban Media* (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017).

Peters, John Durham, *The Marvelous Clouds: Toward a Philosophy of
Elemental Media* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016).

Starosielski, Nicole, *The Undersea Network* (Durham: Duke University
Press, 2015).

Sterne, Jonathan, *MP3: The Meaning of a Format* (Durham: Duke
University Press, 2012).

Striphas, Ted, *The Late Age of Print: Everyday Book Culture from
Consumerism to Control* (New York: Columbia University Press, 2011).

Vismann, Cornelia, *Files: Law and Media Technology*, translated by
Geoffrey Winthrop-Young, (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2008).

[^1]: Bob Brown, *The Readies* (Bad Ems: Roving Eye Press, 1930), 28. On
    Brown's *Readies* see Michael North, "Words in Motion: The Movies,
    the Readies, and the \"Revolution of the Word\","
    *Modernism/modernity* 9, no. 2 (April 2002): 205--223; Jessica
    Pressman, "Machine Poetics and Reading Machines: William
    Poundstone's Electronic Literature and Bob Brown's Readies,"
    *American Literary History* 23, no. 4 (2011): 767--794; Paul
    Stephens, "Bob Brown, '"Inforg"': The '"Readies"' at the Limits of
    Modernist Cosmopolitanism," *Journal of Modern Literature* 35, no. 1
    (2011): 143--164.

[^2]: Brown, *The Readies*, 29.

[^3]: "Microscope," *Encyclopaedia Britannica* (Boston: Little, Brown,
    and Company, 1857), 802; Alan M. Meckler, *Micropublishing: A
    History of Scholarly Micropublishing in America, 1938-1980*
    (Westport: Greenwood Press, 1982), 6.

[^4]: Frederic Luther, *Microfilm: A History, 1839-1900* (Annapolis:
    National Microfilm Association, 1959), 143--62.

[^5]: Meckler, *Micropublishing*, 12.

[^6]: Fiske Bradley, "Reading machine," United States US1411008A, filed
    November 20, 1920, and issued March 28, 1922.

[^7]: Meckler, *Micropublishing*, 10--16.

[^8]: Donald L. Bitzer, Elizabeth R. Lyman, and John A. Easley, "The
    Uses of Plato: A Computer Controlled Teaching System," *Proceedings
    of the Clinic on Library Applications of Data Processing;
    Urbana-Champaign, Ill.* 0 (January 1966): 36; Joy Lisi Rankin, *A
    People's History of Computing in the United States* (Cambridge, MA:
    Harvard University Press, 2018), 171.

[^9]: Bitzer, Lyman, and Easley, "The Uses of Plato," 36.

[^10]: National Science Foundation, "Electronic \"Books\" for Computer
    Input Readied," *Scientific Information Notes* 4, no. 2 (May 1962):
    4.

[^11]: Rubincam David, "Electronic Book," United States US4159417A,
    filed October 28, 1977, and issued June 26, 1979.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Ibid., 5.

[^14]: Percy Lubbock, *The Craft of Fiction* (London: Jonathan Cape,
    1921), 1.

[^15]: Ibid., 274.

[^16]: "OEBPS (Open Ebook Forum Publication Structure) 1.0," web page,
    December 2004, accessed May 24, 2019,
    [www.loc.gov/preservation/digital/formats/fdd/fdd000054.shtml](https://www.loc.gov/preservation/digital/formats/fdd/fdd000054.shtml).

[^17]: Ibid., 23.

[^18]: Ibid., 15--17.

[^19]: "Open Publication Structure (OPS) 2.0.1 V1.0," September 2010,
    accessed May 31, 2019,
    [www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPS\_2.0.1\_draft.htm](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPS_2.0.1_draft.htm).

[^20]: Johanna Drucker, "Reading Interface," *PMLA* 128, no. 1 (2013):
    216.

[^21]: Ibid., 217.

[^22]: Gitta Salomon, Tim Oren, and Kristee Kreitman, "Using Guides to
    Explore Multimedia Databases," in *Proceedings of the Twenty-Second
    Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Volume
    IV: Emerging Technologies and Applications Track*, vol. 4, 1989, 3.

[^23]: Danny Goodman, *The Complete Hypercard Handbook* (New York:
    Bantam Books, 1988), 1--15.

[^24]: Salomon, Oren, and Kreitman, "Using Guides to Explore Multimedia
    Databases," 3.

[^25]: Brenda Laurel, *Computers as Theatre* (Reading: Addison-Wesley,
    1991), 182.

[^26]: Ibid.; Don Abbe, "Narrative and Interface," in *The Art of
    Human-Computer Interface Design*, ed. Brenda Laurel and S. Joy
    Mountford (Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1990), 383.

[^27]: Salomon, Oren, and Kreitman, "Using Guides to Explore Multimedia
    Databases," 7.

[^28]: Laurel, *Computers as Theatre*, 179.

[^29]: "Amazon.com Help: About Amazon Follow," accessed May 31, 2019,
    [www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html](https://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId=201813230).

[^30]: "About Feedbooks," accessed May 31, 2019,
    [www.feedbooks.com/about](http://www.feedbooks.com/about).

[^31]: "An Introduction to \"Book History\"," *Book History* 1 (1998):
    ix--xi, ix.

[^32]: See Steve Ramirez et al., "Creating a False Memory in the
    Hippocampus," *Science (New York)* 341, no. 6144 (July 2013):
    387--391.

[^33]: Virginia Woolf, *The Lighthouse* (New York: Harcourt, Brace,
    1927).
