Reading Platforms

To imagine a possible future of the book, in light of its pasts, I would like to present not so
much a final shape or an object, but rather a sketch---a roadmap---for the study of objects
that very much resemble books, yet require a theoretical reconfiguration so as to appear to the
critical gaze in their full complexity and sheer alien difference to the familiar---still not
without their mystery---constellations made of paper and ink. This sketch will be an
opportunity to introduce several terms borrowed from the fields of media studies and computer
science, terms that should equip us to better understand those explored areas of the map and
those still in need of description, pathfinding, history, and analysis.

Key to this understanding is a presupposition shared by most book historians, textual critics,
and media scholars, which manifests in the attention to the material contexts of ideational
content, for the book represents, at once, a metaphysical construct of the mind and a physical
object. Matter envelops symbol to produce a specifically instantiated thing. Therefore, a
reader's ability to reach anything like the content or the work of art, is limited by or
facilitated by the medium. By that logic, the book is a container for the storage of ideas.

The trans-mediation of mind-things into paper and ink things entails the corresponding
trans-figuration of "content." A line of reasoning resembles a line on a page or a paragraph,
although the two do not transpose perfectly. The structure of thoughts in the abstract---their
transcendent form---and the structure of words on a page---their immanent *format*---meet at
the *interface* of two incompatible systems, the symbolic and biological. An interface is a
point of contact that allows compatibility between physically heterotopic systems. In this way,
the tail end of a fork is shaped to conform to the hand and in that sense begins to resemble a
hand, bearing the imprint of its palm and digits. The hand for its part becomes more fork-like
in grasping the tool.

An interface determines the *affordance* of those actions that can be performed in concert
between heterotopic systems. Between the universe of hand possibilities and fork possibilities,
there lies a subset of actions available only to the combined set. It is not enough to say that
a handle affords grasping, rather, it suggests convenient grasping in a specific way, and
conversely, prevents other ways of grasping made inconvenient and impossible. An interface
determines or governs through its affordances, by spatial arrangement, conforming the hand to
the handle and the handle to the hand. For an archaeologist or a media archaeologist, the
interface bares the traces of usage. Knowing nothing about human hands, an alien archaeologist
would reconstruct them by the shape of our household tools, input devices such as mice and
joysticks, eating and writing implements. Further, the affordance of such artifacts would
suggest their probable use: as the difference between an axe and an adze necessitates distinct
swinging motions and body postures, optimizing each for differing purposes: one for the
chopping and the other for the carving of wood.

By the logic of interfaces and affordances, the very shape of a printed book contains a number
of assumptions about the human body, which include minimally sufficient visual acuity and
manual dexterity. Other-abled bodies, those with poor sight for example, must resort to
assistive devices such as eye spectacles or magnifying loupes. At the other side of the
interface, the book also shapes content as literary formats such as the novel or a short story
define their measurements in relation to the average physical size of the medium. A novel will
always be longer than a few pages and shorter than a million, and often at the some average
range between the possible extremes.

Similarly, the discrete nature of pages structures the pacing of reading on the one hand, and
the pacing of the narrative on the other. Elements of a plot must, for all their variability,
fit within the book. A reader's ability to read quickly or slowly is similarly limited by the
affordances of page turning. In reading for the plot, a reader can advance to its end in a way
that a video game player cannot when playing a video game. These are not natural constraints

Book fits on a shelf.

Letter shapes the word. Word shapes the paragraph. Paragraph shapes the page. Page shapes the
book. Book shapes the shelf. Shelf shapes the room. Room shapes the library. Library shapes
the world.

Platform.
